Add Security section (#4633)
the-turing-way/the-turing-way: book/website/reproducible-research/security.md

Reviewer: This file has external references - I recommend you look at https://book.the-turing-way.org/community-handbook/style/style-citing/ for best practice on how to incorporate these into the book (I know not every chapter does this perfectly!)

(rr-security)=
# Secure Software Development Practices

## Summary

Software security has various aspects that touch upon all parts of software development.
This guide intents to raise awareness of security concerns in data science and 

> research software applications, and to provide practical guidelines to cover common security threats.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
research software applications, and to provide practical guidelines to address common security threats.
```

The audience of these instructions are research software engineers without particular security expertise.
This guide will allow them to conceptually understand different types of risks and to enable best practices to avoid the most common caveats.

```{warning}
Written by research software developers rather than security specialists, this section is designed to raise awareness of cybersecurity risks in research workflows.

> Because every institutional infrastructure is unique, we strongly recommend consulting your local IT security team for tailored guidance that aligns with your organization's specific rules and policies.

Reviewer 2: Great to mention this here explicitly. The general IT security teams are however often pretty far removed from software development, so in practice they are often not the right contact for this. Someone that's closer to practice is typically better. In our case that would be the information manager. 
We could either remove all mentions of a pint of contact or give a list of possible options and say that it will depend on the institution who the right person to ask would be.

Reviewer 3: I tried to keep the advice for consulting more general, but am open to alternative wordings.

```

## Application Areas

> The security principles introduced on this page can be applied to application areas such as:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The security principles introduced on this page can be applied to:
```

1. [Secure development](#rr-secure-development)
2. [Secure deployment](#rr-secure-deployment)
1. [Web server security](#rr-webserver)

## Foundations

Security is about controlling information: who can interact when with it, and 
what they can do with it [2]. Security can be characterized by three closely related goals:
- *Confidentiality* protects data against unauthorized disclosure.
    - For instance, the personal data of survey participants must not be public.
    - As another example, software must prevent access to database.
- *Integrity* protects data against unauthorized modification or assures that 
data are trustworthy.
    - For instance, before a bank transfer is executed, it is important
    to validate that the receiver has not been manipulated.
- *Availability* protects services that provide access to data.
    - For instance, [denial-of-service-attacks](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Denial-of-service_attack) 
    reduce a server's uptime and thus its availability to users.

> 

Reviewer 2: So far, I'm missing a note on shared responsibilities and the role of the developer. A paragraph like this would fit well here imho:

"Modern computing systems, particularly cloud services, are highly complex and rely on many interacting hardware and software components maintained by different organisations. As a result, individual users usually have only limited control over the overall security of these systems. Rather than attempting to make existing systems more secure, users should focus on avoiding introducing vulnerabilities or creating new attack paths."

I think this:
- gives readers a mental model of the complexity,
- reduces the impression that perfect security is an individual responsibility,
- gives context to the later recommendations (updates, MFA, least privilege, etc.) as ways to avoid degrading security, rather than as attempts to make an extremely complex system "secure."

Reviewer 3: Added as suggested.

(rr-security-principles)=

## Software Security Principles

These goals can be achieved by designing the software securely, and by
building/distributing it securely.

### Secure design

> When designing an application from a security perspective,

Reviewer 2: The wording 'designing an application' feels like it limits the scope of this chapter to larger, deployable codebases. 

Suggestion: When "writing research software" OR even broader "when writing code".

Looking at how the words "code", "software" and "applications" are used throughout the book, I asked Chat to pull the implied definitions from the use throughout the book"

> Code is the written implementation.
> Software is the functioning computational product or project containing that implementation.
> An application is software configured or deployed to perform a particular user-facing task.

"Code" seems to be the one that fits the best here imho.

Reviewer 3: I've replaced it with "software", as I'd consider software broader than code, and security is not only about the code (also, I'm not sure that was what you meant, since you suggested similar edits.)

the first question is to ask **what can go wrong**.
This activity is part of a design process called threat modeling. 

> The threat model differs case by case. Here are some example use cases

Reviewer 2: The threat modeling now focuses on the sensitivity and criticality of specific projects, which is great.

I think, however, the threat model should also include that compromised dependencies and third-party software in general are not only critical for a given project, but for the user's system and data *in general* and maybe even for other parts of the organization. After all, a Python package that you install from PyPI (or Github) or an IDE plugin can have the same rights as any executable on your computer. 

These points now somewhat fall into the section "Secure implementation", but I think it's important enough to mention here as well.

A suggestion for an added threat model:
- Third-party software that is used during development (interpreters, dependencies, IDE's and plugins, etc.): Are they obtained from trusted sources? What level of access rights do they have on the user's system and data? What happens if a tool is compromised?

We could then refer to the more detailed and excellent section on dependencies here as well.

Reviewer 3: Thanks! Added as suggested.

and security aspects:

> - An application with public data, few developers and users: What

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Software that uses only public data, few developers and users:
```

happens if one of the developers' laptop is stolen? How does the team
minimize the risks from this?

> - An application that handles sensitive data: How does the system

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Software that handles sensitive data: How does the system
```

protect data from illegitimate requests from an insider---an
administrator, analyst or developer? Do they all need access 
to the entire data system?

> - An application with many contributors where not everyone knows each other:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Software with many contributors where not everyone knows each other:
```

How does the development process protect from an adversarial
developer that aims to steal others' credentials?

> - An application that is distributed to hundreds of users: How does

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Software that is distributed to hundreds of users: How does
```

the application protect from an attacker that uses the application to
infiltrate users' systems?
- An application that is exposed to the internet on a server: [Web Server Setup](#rr-webserver).

Depending on what can go wrong, one needs to define **what to 
do about it**. Incorporating this early in the design process
ensures that security is not an afterthought.
When designing the security of an application, it is useful to

> be aware of, and follow, security principles such as [4, 5]:

Reviewer 2: Might be me, but this looks a little like the reader is supposed to read the references and that the  principles that follow have nothing to do with that.

I would add the references to the principles below.

```suggestion
be aware of, and follow, security principles such as:
```

#### No security guarantee

No application or system is guaranteed to be protected from all attacks.
The goal of security is to make an attack as unattractive
as possible, by increasing the hurdles for a successful attack,
and by minimizing the reward of an attack. 

> Since it applies to all software, the principle also 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This principle also 
```

Maybe we can add a well-known example of e.g. [log4j](https://www.ibm.com/think/topics/log4j)

matters for [managing dependencies](#rr-security-managing-dependencies).

#### Least privilege and separation of duties

Least privilege means that users should only be given access to the 
resources they need for doing their job.
Separation of duties means that tasks and responsibilities are distributed
across different roles, so that no single person has access to everything.

> Examples:

Reviewer 2: I think the examples feel a litte off topic and could be tailored more towards SW development.

Suggestions:
- A team develops code that uses an API to collect information. Each team member uses their own API key that they store locally. They make sure that they do not accidentally include their key in the shared codebase.
- In the spirit of Open Science, a team shares their code publicly via GitHub repositories. Sensitive participant data is, however, only shared via institutionally approved services.

Reviewer 3: Added them. I do think the existing examples are important for SW dev, but I tried to make both more clear, and moved one to the `security-development.md` page.

- In a shared file system such as an HPC cluster, 
implement access controls so that users can only read/modify/execute 
files per their needs.
- Use role-based
database access so that developers, users and administrators only 
see the data they need to see.

#### Defense-in-depth

This reduces the risk of a successful attack by securing a system across
different layers: if one layer
fails, other layers still stand and protect the asset. The layers of security
can be network security, application security, and data security.

Example:
- To protect a data system, application security can come from
requiring authentication to log in to the system. Data security can come 
from role-based access and/or from encrypting/hashing sensitive columns

> such as person names. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

I think this is too advanced for the general user (i.e. reader of this book). I would remove it.

Reviewer 3: I left it because we refer to it in the webserver section. I did try to simplify.

#### Zero trust

This principle assumes that all users, devices, and networks are untrusted
and must be verified before access is granted. This includes data provided 
by users.

Example:
- When exposing a database to user queries, the user inputs need to be validated
and queries parameterized. This prevents from [injection attacks](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Code_injection)
where the user can exfiltrate data they are not supposed to see, or change data they are not 

> supposed to change.

Reviewer 2: Again, I think this example is too technical for the average user. I am thinking maybe a project where you built a web app that can potentially expose sensitive information and you publicly host it  on github, relying on security by obscurity alone.

But it's not a great example either.

Reviewer 3: I tried to simplify and changed the example, but if you feel strongly that it should be removed, I can do that.

### Secure implementation

Implementation concerns building and deploying the software as well as 
managing the defects.

#### Documentation

Software development teams should have good documentation about
security techniques, tools and threats. This increases
awareness for all contributors and helps following

> good practices.

Reviewer 2: Seems like here we want to be more Catholic than the Pope regarding documentation 😅.  I basically only ever see documentation on security on very professional projects, so I don't think we should prescribe this for _all_ cases. 

```suggestion
Software development teams should discuss, agree upon, and, where appropriate, document threats, security techniques, and tools. This increases awareness among all contributors and helps them follow good practices.
```

In cases where users interact in public with developers---such as
by opening issues on GitHub---, a security policy can be added to the 
repository. The policy gives instructions on how to report a security
vulnerability, avoiding a public report [6], and thus reducing the risk 

> that the report is exploited by an attacker.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For public codebases, a security policy can be added to the 
repository. The policy gives instructions on how to report a security
vulnerability to the developers confidentially instead of via a public report [6]. This reduces the risk 
that the vulnerability is exploited by an attacker.
```

In 2026, GitHub has added an experimental [feature for private vulnerability reports](https://docs.github.com/en/code-security/how-tos/report-and-fix-vulnerabilities/configure-vulnerability-reporting/configure-for-a-repository).
These are enabled per repository and allow a user to report a security-related issue to the repository maintainers.

(rr-security-managing-dependencies)=
#### Managing dependencies

Tracking dependencies is important also from a security point of view 
because they can be an entry point for an attacker:

> - If a dependency has a vulnerability, all users are potentially

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- If a dependency has a vulnerability, all users (including the developers) are potentially
```

exposed to it. 
- In contrast to vulnerabilities, supply chain attacks are 
deliberate attempts to inject malicious code and distribute it through

> popular libraries. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- So-called *supply chain attacks* are deliberate attempts to inject malicious code into widely used packages. Attackers aim to introduce hidden vulnerabilities into valuable target systems that rely on the compromised dependencies.
```

    - For example, in an incident from 2026, the `lite-llm` package contained code that
extracts secrets such as passwords whenever Python is called.
- Developer tools such as editor extensions or plugins are also dependencies,

> and pose a threat to the security of the developer's machine.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Developer tools such as editors or editor plugins can also be compromised and hence form a security risk for the security of the developer's machine and their data.
```

Not only code and software, but also machine learning models
are dependencies and can represent a threat. For instance, using the `pickle`
module in Python to store and distribute machine learning model weights is vulnerable
to arbitrary code execution. This is why the [`safetensors`](https://huggingface.co/docs/safetensors/index) format was
introduced and should be used.

**Reducing dependency risks**

A few rules help reduce risks from dependencies:

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

- Obtain _dependencies_ and _developer tools_ from trusted sources
    - Choose providers that have an effective security policy in place for their content. For example, GitHub only performs minimal checks on repositories. whereas repositories like PyPI [7] and CRAN [8] have a good track record of catching vulnerabilities.
    - Download software such as VSCode, RStudio, conda-forge and git directly from the developers' websites.
    - Prefer software and packages that have been available for some time. This increases the likelihood that the community has not found any structural vulnerabilities or exposed the developer as being malicious.
```

> - Choose dependencies carefully -- this is about trade-offs:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Be conscious about _dependencies_ and _developer tools_ you choose to use -- it is about trade-offs:
```

    - On the one hand, don't reinvent the wheel -- existing frameworks and tools, especially
    those implementing core security features, are likely

>     more secure because they have been hardened "in the wild".

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    - On the one hand, don't reinvent the wheel -- there are myriads of great open source tools that are there for you to use. That means you do not need to build that functionality on your own!
```

    - On the other hand, do not add dependencies that are obscure or 

>     provide trivial functionality.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    - Be careful with dependencies that only add trivial or obscure functionality.
- Prefer widely used existing frameworks and tools, especially those implementing core security features. They are likely more secure because they have been hardened "in the wild".
- Prefer software and packages that are still under active development and that don't rely on outdated dependencies.
- Be mindful of the number of dependencies that are used in your project, including the ones used by the dependencies on their own.
    - The more dependencies you use, the higher the chance that one of them might be compromised.
    - Consider checking for and removing dependencies that are no longer needed by your software.
```

- Keep dependencies up to date. 

>     - This ensures users receive vulnerability

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    - This ensures that you and your users receive security
```

fixes from dependencies.
    - To reduce exposure to supply chain attacks, consider reducing 
    immediate upgrades to new versions: For instance, `uv` allows for 
    specifying a time lag (e.g. 1 week) for upgrading dependencies in deployed software ([dependency cooldowns](https://docs.astral.sh/uv/concepts/resolution/#dependency-cooldowns)). 
    This gives maintainers of dependencies time to react.

> - Run vulnerability scans for dependencies.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Regularly run vulnerability scans for your dependencies.
```

    - [GitHub Dependabot](https://docs.github.com/en/code-security/tutorials/secure-your-dependencies/dependabot-quickstart) for generic dependency checks.
    - [OWASP dependency check for web applications](https://devguide.owasp.org/en/05-implementation/02-dependencies/01-dependency-check/).
    - Python dependency checks: [`pip-audit`](https://github.com/pypa/pip-audit) 
      and [`uv audit`](https://docs.astral.sh/uv/reference/cli/#uv-audit).
- Run security scans for files.
    - Example: [clamscan](https://docs.clamav.net/manual/Usage/Scanning.html)

## Ethics & Data Privacy

The present section touches on ethics and data privacy from a perspective of software
design and development.
However, these topics have many other aspects, and they are covered throughout

> the _Turing Way_.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For more information on ethics and data privacy, check out these sections
- [](##er-intro)
- [](##er-social-data)
- [](##er-committees)
- [](##er-law-policy)
- [](##er-datahazardsintro)
- [](##er-ethics-open-source-governance)
```

Author: @StefKirsch I just noticed that these links seem to fail the build.
Honestly, the correct link syntax has been a mystery to me to the degree that I had to fall back to the `{ref}` syntax, which seems to be outdated. If you have an example on how such cross-references actually work, please let us know!

Topics that cover the foundational steps taken before code is written, ensuring alignment 
with institutional policies and ethical standards. 
1. {ref}`Privacy and Security in Research Ethics Committees<er-committees>`
2. {ref}`Data Security and Project Planning<pd-sdp>` 

### Data Privacy Strategies
The chapter {ref}`Data Privacy Strategies<pd-sdpm-privacy>` discusses specific 
strategies for keeping sensitive research data secure.

## Further Reading

1. OWASP Foundation, "OWASP Application Security Verification Standard 5.0.0," Open Web Application Security Project, v5.0.0, 2023. [Online]. Available: https://raw.githubusercontent.com/OWASP/ASVS/v5.0.0/5.0/OWASP_Application_Security_Verification_Standard_5.0.0_en.pdf
2. OWASP Foundation. "OWASP Developer Guide". [Online]. Available: https://devguide.owasp.org/.
3. OWASP Foundation. "Secure Design". https://devguide.owasp.org/en/04-design/
4. OWASP Foundation. "Principles of security". https://devguide.owasp.org/en/02-foundations/03-security-principles/
5. OWASP Foundation. "Secure Product Design Cheat Sheet". https://cheatsheetseries.owasp.org/cheatsheets/Secure_Product_Design_Cheat_Sheet

> 6. GitHub. Adding a security policy to your repository. https://docs.github.com/en/code-security/how-tos/report-and-fix-vulnerabilities/configure-vulnerability-reporting/add-security-policy

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
6. GitHub. Adding a security policy to your repository. https://docs.github.com/en/code-security/how-tos/report-and-fix-vulnerabilities/configure-vulnerability-reporting/add-security-policy
7. PyPI has completed its second audit. https://blog.pypi.org/posts/2026-04-16-pypi-completes-second-audit/
8. CRAN. CRAN Repository Policy. https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/policies.html
```

(rr-security)=
# Secure Software Development Practices

## Summary

Software security has various aspects that touch upon all parts of software development.
This guide intents to raise awareness of security concerns in data science and 
research software applications, and to provide practical guidelines to address common security threats.

The audience of these instructions are research software engineers without particular security expertise.

> This guide will allow them to conceptually understand different types of risks and to enable best practices to avoid the most common caveats.

Reviewer 4: add Prerequisites table insted  at the start.

Author: Done!

```{warning}
Written by research software developers rather than security specialists, 
this section is designed to raise awareness of cybersecurity risks in research workflows.

Consult with your institution for aligning with their policies.
```

## Application Areas

The security principles introduced on this page can be applied to:

1. [Secure development](#rr-secure-development)
2. [Secure deployment](#rr-secure-deployment)
1. [Web server security](#rr-webserver)

## Foundations

Security is about controlling information: who can interact when with it, and 

> what they can do with it [2]. Security can be characterized by three closely related goals:

Reviewer: Also on references, the numbering appears to start at [2]

    - Example: [clamscan](https://docs.clamav.net/manual/Usage/Scanning.html)

## Ethics & Data Privacy

The present section touches on ethics and data privacy from a perspective of software
design and development.
For more information on ethics and data privacy, check out these sections:
- {ref}`Introduction to Research Ethics<er-intro>`
- {ref}`Research Ethics for Social Data<er-social-data>`
- {ref}`Research Ethics Committees Processes<er-committees>`
- {ref}`Law, Policy and Human Rights in Ethics<er-law-policy>`
- {ref}`Introduction to Data Hazards Project<er-datahazardsintro>`
- {ref}`Ethical Considerations when Choosing an Open Source Governance Model<er-ethics-open-source-governance>`

### Institutional Compliance & Project Design
Topics that cover the foundational steps taken before code is written, ensuring alignment 
with institutional policies and ethical standards. 
1. {ref}`Privacy and Security in Research Ethics Committees<er-committees>`
2. {ref}`Data Security and Project Planning<pd-sdp>` 

### Data Privacy Strategies
The chapter {ref}`Data Privacy Strategies<pd-sdpm-privacy>` discusses specific 
strategies for keeping sensitive research data secure.

> ## Further Reading

Reviewer 4: Is it different than references ? is there not a specific way to deal with reference.

Author: You are right. I have added references to the bibliography file and refered to them in the section.

| Prerequisite | Importance | Notes |
| ------------- | ------------ | ------- |
| {ref}`Code Quality<rr-code-quality>` | Helpful | Understand the impact of robust and maintainable code |
| {ref}`Testing<rr-testing-guidance>` | Helpful | Understanding fundamentals of software testing. |
 {ref}`Code Reviewing<rr-checklist-for-code-review>` | Helpful | Understanding the principles of code reviews. |
| {ref}`Version Control<rr-vcs>` | Helpful | Understanding the way that [GitHub](https://github.com) arranges its branches, forks, and pull requests within repositories is needed. |

```{warning}
Written by research software developers rather than security specialists, 
this section is designed to raise awareness of cybersecurity risks in research workflows.

Consult with your institution for aligning with their policies.
```

## Application Areas

The security principles introduced on this page can be applied to:

1. [Secure development](#rr-secure-development)
2. [Secure deployment](#rr-secure-deployment)
1. [Web server security](#rr-webserver)

## Foundations

Security is about controlling information: who can interact when with it, and 

> what they can do with it [2]. Security can be characterized by three closely related goals:

Reviewer 5: What does [2] mean here?

- *Confidentiality* protects data against unauthorized disclosure.
    - For instance, the personal data of survey participants must not be public.
    - As another example, software must prevent access to database.
- *Integrity* protects data against unauthorized modification or assures that 
data are trustworthy.
    - For instance, before a bank transfer is executed, it is important
    to validate that the receiver has not been manipulated.
- *Availability* protects services that provide access to data.
    - For instance, [denial-of-service-attacks](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Denial-of-service_attack) 

>     reduce a server's uptime and thus its availability to users.

Reviewer 5: I don't like the list structure here, it looks like rough notes.

Reviewer 5: This happens quite a bit in this page.

This principle also 
matters for [managing dependencies](#rr-security-managing-dependencies).

#### Least privilege and separation of duties

Least privilege means that users should only be given access to the 
resources they need for doing their job.
Separation of duties means that tasks and responsibilities are distributed
across different roles, so that no single person has access to everything.

Examples:
- A team develops code that uses an API to collect information. 
Each team member uses their own API key that they store locally.
They make sure that they do not accidentally include their key in the shared codebase.
- In the spirit of Open Science, a team shares their code publicly via GitHub
repositories. Sensitive participant data is, however, only shared via 
institutionally approved services.
- In a system that collects sensitive personal data from a survey, use role-based 
database access so that developers, users and administrators only see
the data they need to see.

#### Defense-in-depth

Securing a system across different layers reduces the risk of a successful attack:
if one layer fails, other layers still stand and protect the asset. 

> Example:
> - To protect a data system, requiring users to log in gives one layer of protection.
> Another layer comes from restricting which data a user can see, for instance
> by restricting access to information on the person name.

Reviewer 5: Admonitions would look nice here

```suggestion
:::{hint} Example
To protect a data system, requiring users to log in gives one layer of protection.
Another layer comes from restricting which data a user can see, for instance
by restricting access to information on the person name.
:::
```

and in the other cases

### Institutional Compliance & Project Design
Topics that cover the foundational steps taken before code is written, ensuring alignment 
with institutional policies and ethical standards. 
1. {ref}`Privacy and Security in Research Ethics Committees<er-committees>`
2. {ref}`Data Security and Project Planning<pd-sdp>` 

### Data Privacy Strategies
The chapter {ref}`Data Privacy Strategies<pd-sdpm-privacy>` discusses specific 
strategies for keeping sensitive research data secure.

## Further Reading

The Application Security Verification Standard (@cuthbert_application_2025) is a list of application security requirements that architects, developers, testers, security professionals, tool vendors, and consumers can use to define, build, test, and verify secure applications.

The Open Worldwide Application Security Project (OWASP) is a nonprofit foundation that works to improve the security of software: @noauthor_devguide_nodate
It provides dedicated sections about security design and security principles with a secure product design cheat sheet:

- @noauthor_security_design_nodate
- @noauthor_security_principles_nodate

> - @noauthor_secure_cheatsheet_nodate

Reviewer 5: Do these make more sense as links rather than references. If we don't have authors I'm not sure they will render very well.
